Add Kotlin DSL improvements to 8.1 release notes (#24136)
gradle/gradle: subprojects/docs/src/docs/release/notes.md

TODO - File collections queried at configuration time are treated as configuration inputs.
TODO - File system repositories are fully supported including dynamic versions in Maven, Maven local, and Ivy repositories

### Kotlin DSL improvements

> Gradle's [Kotlin DSL](userguide/kotlin_dsl.html) provides an alternative syntax to the Groovy DSL with an enhanced editing experience in supported IDEs — superior content assistance, refactoring, documentation and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gradle's [Kotlin DSL](userguide/kotlin_dsl.html) provides an alternative syntax to the Groovy DSL with an enhanced editing experience in supported IDEs — superior content assistance, refactoring, documentation, and more.
```

#### Version catalogs for plugins in the `plugins {}` block

Version catalog accessors for plugin aliases in the `plugins {}` block aren't shown as errors in IntelliJ IDEA and Android Studio Kotlin script editor anymore.

```kotlin
plugins {
    alias(libs.plugins.jmh)
}
```

If you were using a workaround for this before, see the [corresponding section](userguide/upgrading_version_8.html#kotlin_dsl_plugins_catalogs_workaround) in the upgrading guide.

#### Easier access to extensions on the `Gradle` object 

> The `Gradle` type now declares that it is `ExtensionAware`.

Reviewer 2: 💭 
Do a lot of people use this? It might be nice to list why it is useful in init scripts?

Author: I would say not a lot of people use this. This is mostly for init scripts as written two lines below.

Do you still think this needs more details?

Reviewer 2: Considering that this is a good level of detail but I would move it to later in the section.

This allows access to extensions without casting to `ExtensionAware` from Kotlin.
This can be useful in [initialization scripts](userguide/init_scripts.html).

```kotlin
// Assuming the Gradle object has an extension of type MyExtension
configure<MyExtension> {
    someProperty.set("value")
}

// Assuming the Gradle object has an optional extra property named 'myOption'
val myOption: String? by extra
```

See the [ExtensionAware](dsl/org.gradle.api.plugins.ExtensionAware.html#org.gradle.api.plugins.ExtensionAware) type documentation for more information.

#### Easier configuration of `Test.forkEvery` from Kotlin

> It is now easier to configure the `forkEvery` property of `Test` tasks from Kotlin.

Reviewer 2: 💭 
Maybe a little blurb about why one configures `forkEvery`?

The property nullability is now coherent and instead of requiring to use its `setForkEvery(<number>)` setter you can now simply assign it a value:

```kotlin
tasks.test {
    forkEvery = 8
}
```

See the [Test.forkEvery](dsl/org.gradle.api.tasks.testing.Test.html#org.gradle.api.tasks.testing.Test:forkEvery) property documentation for more information.

#### Kotlin script compilation improvements

Gradle [Kotlin DSL scripts](userguide/kotlin_dsl.html#sec:scripts) are compiled by Gradle during the configuration phase of your build.

Deprecation warnings found by the Kotlin compiler are now reported on the console.
This makes it easier to spot usages of deprecated members in your build scripts.

```text
> Configure project :
w: build.gradle.kts:4:5: 'getter for uploadTaskName: String!' is deprecated. Deprecated in Java
```

> Moreover, Kotlin DSL script compilation errors are now always reported in the file order

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Moreover, Kotlin DSL script compilation errors are now always reported in the file order.
```

> Moreover, Kotlin DSL script compilation errors are now always reported in the file order

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, Kotlin DSL script compilation errors are now always reported in the file order.
```

This makes it easier to figure out the first root cause of a script compilation failure.

```text
* Where:
Build file 'build.gradle.kts' line: 5

* What went wrong:
Script compilation errors:

  Line 5: functionDoesNotExist()
          ^ Unresolved reference: functionDoesNotExist

  Line 8: doesNotExistEither = 23
          ^ Unresolved reference: doesNotExistEither

2 errors
```

#### `kotlin-dsl` plugin improvements

The [Kotlin DSL Plugin](userguide/kotlin_dsl.html#sec:kotlin-dsl_plugin) provides a convenient way to develop Kotlin-based projects that contribute build logic.

##### Easier customization of Kotlin options

Thanks to the Kotlin Gradle Plugin now using Gradle lazy properties, the `kotlin-dsl` plugin does not use `afterEvaluate {}` for configuring Kotlin compiler options anymore.

> This allows for easier customization of Kotlin options in your build logic without requiring to also use `afterEvaluate {}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows for easier customization of Kotlin options in your build logic without requiring you to also use `afterEvaluate {}`.
```

> This allows for easier customization of Kotlin options in your build logic without requiring to also use `afterEvaluate {}`.

Reviewer 2: 💄 
```suggestion
This allows for easier customization of Kotlin options in your build logic without requiring `afterEvaluate {}`.
```

```kotlin
plugins {
    `kotlin-dsl`
}
tasks.withType<KotlinCompile>().configureEach {
    compilerOptions {
        languageVersion.set(KotlinVersion.KOTLIN_1_9)
    }
}
```

> The standalone script compilation is also now configured to skip the pre-release check in order to allow referencing Kotlin code compiled with more recent Kotlin language versions on a best-effort basis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The standalone script compilation is also now configured to skip the pre-release check to allow referencing Kotlin code compiled with more recent Kotlin language versions on a best-effort basis.
```

> The standalone script compilation is also now configured to skip the pre-release check in order to allow referencing Kotlin code compiled with more recent Kotlin language versions on a best-effort basis.

Reviewer 2: 💄 
```suggestion
The standalone script compilation is also configured to skip the pre-release check to allow referencing Kotlin code compiled with more recent Kotlin language versions on a best-effort basis.
```

##### Published with proper licensing information

The `kotlin-dsl` plugin is now published to the Gradle Plugin Portal with proper licensing information in its metadata.
The plugin is published under the same license as the Gradle Build Tool: the Apache License  Version 2.0.

> This makes it easier to use the `kotlin-dsl` plugin in an enterprise setting where published licensing information is required. 

Reviewer 2: 💄 
```suggestion
This makes using the `kotlin-dsl` plugin easier in an enterprise setting where published licensing information is required. 
```

> #### Precompiled Kotlin script plugins improvements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Precompiled Kotlin script plugin improvements
```

In addition to plugins written as standalone projects, Gradle also allows you to provide build logic written in Kotlin as [precompiled script plugins](userguide/custom_plugins.html#sec:precompiled_plugins).
You write these as `*.gradle.kts` files in `src/main/kotlin` directory.

##### Respect `--offline`

Building precompiled script plugins now respects the [--offline](userguide/command_line_interface.html#sec:command_line_execution_options) command line execution option.

> This makes it easier to use Gradle plugins that react to `--offline` from precompiled script plugins.

Reviewer 2: 💄  Just reordering so the subject is initially clearer. 
```suggestion
This makes using Gradle plugins that react to `--offline` from precompiled script plugins easier.
```

> ##### Less verbose compilation

Reviewer 2: 💭 
Is it sad that I kind of want to be needlessly verbose in this section? 😄

Author: :) I added some details. Better now?

> Building precompiled script plugins is now less verbose and do not clutter the console output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Building precompiled script plugins is now less verbose and does not clutter the console output.
```

> The output is captured and only shown in case of failure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output is captured and only shown in case of failures.
```

##### Better validation of name and path

Precompiled script plugins must respect documented [naming conventions](userguide/kotlin_dsl.html#script_file_names).

> When they do not, Gradle now fails with a explicit and helpful error message.

Reviewer 2: 💄 
```suggestion
Gradle will now fail with an explicit and helpful error message when naming conventions are not followed.
```

> When they do not, Gradle now fails with a explicit and helpful error message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When they do not, Gradle now fails with an explicit and helpful error message.
```
